.TH TAMER::FD 3 2007-06-05 Tamer "Tamer Manual"
.ds E \-\-\-
.if t .ds E \(em
.de M
.BR "\\$1" "(\\$2)\\$3"
..
.SH NAME
tamer_fd \- Tamer file descriptor support
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <tamer/fd.hh>
.B using namespace tamer;
.sp
\fBclass fd { public:
    fd();
    \&...
}
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B tamer::fd
class wraps file descriptors in a convenient interface for
.M tamer 3
event-based programming.  Its methods resemble Unix system calls, but
adapted for Tamer events.
.LP
.B fd
wrappers are reference-counted and may be freely passed as arguments,
copied, assigned, and destroyed.  Many 
.B fd
wrappers may refer to the same underlying file descriptor.  This file
descriptor is closed when the last wrapper to reference it is destroyed.
Alternately, the 
.B fd::close() 
member function explicitly closes the underlying file descriptor.
.M
When a file descriptor is closed, any pending 
.B tamer::at_fd_read() 
and
.B tamer::at_fd_write() 
events are canceled, and any pending 
.BR tamer::fd::read() , 
.BR tamer::fd::write() ,
.BR tamer::fd::accept() ,
.BR tamer::fd::connect() ,
and similar pending 
.B fd
methods will terminate with the
.B \-ECANCELED 
error code (or, equivalently,
.BR tamer::outcome::cancel ). 
Any 
.B fd
methods on a closed file descriptor return the
.B \-EBADF
error code.
.LP
For more information, please see the comments in the
.B <tamer/fd.hh>
header file, or this Web address:
.nf
http://www.read.cs.ucla.edu/tamer/doxygen/classtamer_1_1fd.html
'
.SH AUTHOR
Eddie Kohler <kohler@cs.ucla.edu>
.br
Based on joint work on Tame with Maxwell Krohn <krohn@mit.edu> and Frans
Kaashoek <kaashoek@mit.edu>
'
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.M tamer 3 ,
.M tamer 1
.LP
\*(lqEvents Can Make Sense\*(rq.  Maxwell Krohn, Eddie Kohler, and Frans
Kaashoek.  In
.I Proc. USENIX 2007 Annual Technical Conference.
Also available at
http://www.cs.ucla.edu/~kohler/pubs/krohn07events.pdf
