.TH TAMER 1 2007-04-30 Tamer "Tamer Processor Manual"
.ds E \-\-\-
.if t .ds E \(em
.de M
.BR "\\$1" "(\\$2)\\$3"
..
.SH NAME
tamer \- C++ preprocessor for event-driven programming
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR tamer " [" \-g "] [" "\-o \fIfile" "] " \fIfile
.br
.BR tamer " [" \-g "] " \-c " \fIfile"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B tamer
C++ preprocessor reads a source file that uses the
.B Tamer
extensions and generates the corresponding conventional C++.
.LP
The
.B Tamer
programming model is described in more detail at
.M tamer 3 .
'
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B \-g
Generate code in debugging mode.  Debugging mode tracks the filenames and
line numbers corresponding to important objects at runtime, allowing
.B Tamer
to generate better error messages.
.TP 5
.BI \-o " file"
Places the output C++ source in
.IR file .
.TP 5
.BI \-c
Compilation mode: automatically derives the output filename from the input
filename.  For example, a file named
.B ex1.tt
will be compiled into a file named
.BR ex1.cc ,
.B ex2.tpp
will be compiled into
.BR ex2.cpp ,
and so forth.
'
.SH BUGS AND LIMITATIONS
.LP
There are several limitations in handling
.BR tamed
class member functions.  Do not define a
.B tamed
member function in the class body.  Also,
.B tamed
static member function
.I definitions
must use the 
.B static
keyword (this is illegal in normal C++).  For example, don't say this:
.nf
.sp
    class foo {
        tamed void memfn() { ... };
        tamed static void staticmemfn();
    };
    tamed void foo::staticmemfn() { ... }
.sp
.fi
Say this:
.nf
.sp
    class foo {
        tamed void memfn();
        tamed static void staticmemfn();
    };
    tamed void foo::memfn() { ... }
    tamed static void foo::staticmemfn() { ... }
.sp
.fi
.LP
There are likely remaining bugs in class member functions and template
functions.
.LP
The
.B tamed
keyword must be the first thing in the function declaration.
.LP
.B Tamer
preprocessing should happen
.I after
the normal C++ preprocessor, but it currently happens before.
'
.SH AUTHOR
Maxwell Krohn <krohn@mit.edu>: original Tame version
.br
Eddie Kohler <kohler@cs.ucla.edu>: improvements, port to
.B Tamer
'
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.M tamer 3
.LP
\*(lqEvents Can Make Sense\*(rq.  Maxwell Krohn, Eddie Kohler, and Frans
Kaashoek.  In
.I Proc. USENIX 2007 Annual Technical Conference.
Also available at
http://www.cs.ucla.edu/~kohler/pubs/krohn07events.pdf
